CHAPTER II

ORKHAN

A NEW NATION IS FORMED AND COMES INTO CONTACT WITH THE WESTERN WORLD


I

The greatest inheritance that a father can leave to his son is
uncompleted work, especially if the work present difficulties of a
formidable character, which must be met and overcome immediately. No man
is born great. No man has greatness thrust upon him. History recognizes
only the category of achievement. Facing an unfinished task is the best
spur.

Osman died at the moment of the surrender of Brusa. He left to Orkhan
the inheritance of Nicaea and Nicomedia unconquered; a state without
laws, coinage, and definite boundaries; a people just beginning to
awaken to a national consciousness; and hostile neighbours far more
powerful than himself.[90] Orkhan found himself without seaport, ships,
or sailors. His fighting men were regarded among his Turkish rivals as
poor material for an army.[91] Even the chieftainship of the Osmanlis
had not come to him by mere right of birth.[92] He had been chosen
because of his ability to lead and to attract men. Now that Brusa had
fallen into the hands of the Osmanlis, more was demanded in their emir
than personal charm and daring in battle. He must establish his right to
the chieftainship by making a viable state. This could be done only by
the addition of Nicaea and Nicomedia to his dominions, and by the
transformation of his followers into a nation.

Nowhere are the Ottoman historians more unsatisfactory than in their
accounts of the reign of Orkhan. They fail to describe--much less to
explain--the evolution of their race during these thirty-five years from
a heterogeneous band of adventurers into a nation. Several of the
Ottoman historians write so admirably of later periods that we must
attribute this failure as much to their lack of sources of information
as to their inability to measure up to the demands of the modern mind
which never asks how without adding why. The re-writing of history in
the twentieth century is not actuated by belief in superior ability. Our
new and wider point of view is gained from the advantage we have had in
securing and comparing sources which were inaccessible to those who have
gone before us. If, in this chapter, Byzantine sources are largely used,
it is because we are writing the history of a people who built their
nation directly upon the ruins of the Byzantine Empire, and because the
Byzantine sources are contemporary; while the earliest Ottoman
historians wrote more than a century later than this period.[93]

The reign of Orkhan is divided into two parts by the events of the year
1344. From 1326 to 1344 he was occupied in subduing the territory of
which he had been tentative master at the death of Osman, in forming
his nation, and in organizing his army. From 1344 until his death in
1360, his energies were bent chiefly upon getting a foothold in
Macedonia and Thrace.


II

The first task which imposed itself upon Orkhan was the subjection of
Nicaea and Nicomedia. Just as the walls of Brusa had defied him to the
end, those of Nicomedia and Nicaea were equally impregnable to the kind
of army he could assemble. Whether it was that neither Byzantine nor
Turk nor Slav nor Bulgarian were of the stock who would spend themselves
scaling walls and battering down gates, or that the weapons of those
days were more favourable for the purpose of defence than of assault,
cannot be determined. But the curious fact remains that during this
century there are few instances of cities taken by storm. Captures were
effected for the most part by capitulation or by treachery.

Complete investment and consequent threatened starvation did not occur
in the case of Brusa. Nor did Nicaea and Nicomedia surrender from
starvation. This is the place, rather than at the end of the last
chapter, to give two of the long list of reasons for surrender which
Neshri puts into the mouth of the commandant and the leading citizens of
Brusa.[94] For they state equally plainly and convincingly the case of
Nicaea and Nicomedia.

The economic reason was that the inhabitants saw the Osmanlis settling
themselves in all the country round about the three cities, and
undisturbed in their permanent occupation of these regions by any
aggressive movement from Constantinople. Nicomedia, although
advantageously located for commerce, was not a port of call on the great
trade route. It depended for its well-being upon an unrestricted
communication with the interior. Brusa and Nicaea were manufacturing
cities, whose prosperity was due to the use of raw materials produced in
the vicinity, and to the ability to market the manufactured products.
While food was still procurable, trade and business languished. When the
Greeks saw that the Osmanlis had come in their midst to remain, and were
not mere raiders like the Seljuk Turks, they realized that the
alternative to submission was ruin.

The moral reason I have already touched upon in relation to Brusa. If
there had been any hope of relief from the intolerable economic
conditions under which they were living, the Nicaeans and Nicomedians
might have resisted indefinitely, and maintained a gallant struggle for
love of God and country. Their successful resistance, continued through
many weary years, is a remarkable testimony to their religious zeal and
to their patriotism. It was not until they felt themselves deserted by
their brothers of blood and religion that they finally yielded. The
Osmanlis did not prevail over them in battle. Their walls were not
stormed. Their gates held fast. They were not starved out. They were
abandoned by the Byzantines. So they became Osmanlis.


III

To understand the how and why of the fall of these cities and of the
mingling of victor and vanquished in one race, we must review the
history of the Byzantines during the years immediately following the
death of Osman.

The loss of Brusa did not cause any cessation in the suicidal strife
between Andronicus and his grandson. After the brilliant marriage
festivities of which we have already spoken, young Andronicus took his
bride to Demotika, where, in the summer of 1327, he planned to surprise
and oust his grandfather.[95] He was not content to wait for the old
man’s death. Nor was he deterred from reopening the civil war by the
thought of the imminent danger of the Byzantine cities in Bithynia. Old
Andronicus, informed of his grandson’s intention, forbade his entrance
to the capital, and negotiated with the Serbians to attack him from the
rear.[96] This was a deliberate invitation to the Serbians, who were
rapidly becoming dangerous enemies of the Empire, to enter Byzantine
territory.

The appeal of young Andronicus to be allowed to come to Constantinople
to justify himself was answered by an imperial rescript ordering the
Patriarch to ‘strike out the rebel’s name from public prayers’. The
Patriarch refused.[97] More than that, His Holiness threatened to
unfrock any priest who would obey the imperial command. Old Andronicus
had the Patriarch deposed by a packed synod of his creatures, and thrown
into prison.[98]

War broke out. After an unsuccessful attempt to surprise
Constantinople,[99] young Andronicus besieged the army of his
grandfather and the Serbians in Serres. They did not care to risk a
battle, so he marched on Salonika, which he captured through the
connivance of its inhabitants.[100] Macedonia and Thrace, with the
exception of two or three fortresses, fell into his hands without a
struggle.[101]

Stephen, Kral of Serbia, now turned a deaf ear to the old emperor’s
reiterated appeals for further aid. In his desperation, old Andronicus
called in the Bulgarians, to whom he would have betrayed
Constantinople, had not young Andronicus appeared in time to anticipate
this culminating infamy of the older Palaeologos. A Venetian fleet,
which was besieging the city, retired, because its commander did not
want to appear to take sides either for or against the younger emperor.
Friends inside left a gate open. Young Andronicus entered and appeared
suddenly at the palace. The Patriarch was re-established. Old Andronicus
was deposed and imprisoned.[102]

The old man, after having become, as Gregoras charitably puts it, ‘blind
through tears’,[103] retired to a monastery, and died there in great
poverty.[104] Like many others of the Palaeologi, Andronicus II had no
redeeming trait of character, no single good deed to his credit.
Stranger to every natural affection, he died as he had lived, hating his
own flesh and blood, striving to ruin his country, mocking God by the
very monk’s garb that he wore.

The first care of young Andronicus, after ridding himself of his
grandfather and rival, was to march on Adrianople, where, according to
Cantacuzenos, he forced Michael Asan of Bulgaria to make peace by the
display of his ‘fine army’.[105] Either the Bulgarians were very weak at
this time, or the ‘fine army’ of Andronicus III melted away quickly. For
in the spring of the following year, 1329, Andronicus had to ‘gather
hastily’[106] an army, when for the first time he felt it his duty to go
to the aid of beleaguered Nicaea. He crossed the Bosphorus, and joined
the battle with the Osmanlis at Pelecanon, now Maltepé, on the north
shore of the gulf of Nicomedia, a few miles from Chalcedon, the modern
Haïdar Pasha.

The battle of Pelecanon is passed over in silence by the Ottoman
historians as too insignificant to mention. But it is of the utmost
importance in showing why the Nicaeans surrendered their city to Orkhan.
Cantacuzenos, who took part in this battle, gives a long story in which
the result of the battle he is compelled to record belies all that goes
before it. The Byzantines, according to Cantacuzenos, were eminently
successful in repelling the attacks of the Osmanlis. On all sides the
Greeks won, and killed hundreds of their opponents, while their own
losses were slight. After inflicting this defeat upon Orkhan, Andronicus
proposed, at nightfall, that the army withdraw to Constantinople! Some
of his ardent warriors continued, however, to engage the enemy.
Andronicus, surprised with only a few followers around him, was wounded,
and escaped capture only by a hasty retreat. He was carried in a litter
to Scutari, where he did not wait for news of his army. A caïque
conveyed him safely home. Thus the successors of the Caesars abandoned
Asia for ever.

Old Andronicus, in his hour of humiliation, did not hesitate to strike
one more blow against his country. Spies of his in the army spread the
rumour that the young emperor was dead. The imperial troops fled. They
abandoned all their baggage, and were massacred by the Osmanlis, who
hunted them down in the hills from which the fugitives could see the
dome of St. Sophia.[107]

When we contrast the long story of the civil war between Andronicus and
his grandfather, the armies gathered, the money expended, the energy
displayed with this one pitiful attempt to aid the three great cities
of Bithynia, there is no need for further speculation as to why these
cities fell into the hands of the Osmanlis. No wearers of the imperial
purple had ever made a more dismal showing: old Andronicus plotting to
demoralize the army of his country by false rumours, and young
Andronicus making such rumours possible by being the first to flee from
the field after receiving a slight wound. It is no wonder that
Cantacuzenos records that after this battle Nicaea fell into the hands
of the Osmanlis.[108] It is altogether natural, too, that the
inhabitants of Nicaea should refuse, as those of Brusa had done, to
profit by the terms of the capitulation, and leave for
Constantinople.[109] Their trades, silk-weaving and pottery, were
dependent upon local materials, which they could not get elsewhere.
There had been nothing to inspire in them that devotion to a faith which
made the Huguenots long afterwards leave all without hesitation after
the revocation of the Edict of Nantes.

Hadji Khalfa says that in the seventeenth century the walls of Nicaea
were entirely ruined.[110] The condition of these walls to-day (for they
have not been repaired in modern times) contradicts this statement. It
has been the claim of the Osmanlis that Nicaea was reduced by fighting.
If this were true the walls must have suffered. It is also the common
belief[111] that Nicaea, at the time of the Ottoman conquest, and for
some time after, was a prosperous city.[112] But Ibn Batutah, who
visited Nicaea within five or six years after its change of ownership,
wrote that its walls were intact, that the sole entrance to the city was
by a road built up like a bridge and so narrow that horsemen could not
pass on it, and that the walls were surrounded by a wide deep moat
filled with water. One had to reach the gate by a pont-levis, which was
in working order and used at the time of his visit. The city itself was
in ruins and occupied only by a small number of men in the service of
Orkhan. He was told that Orkhan had besieged the city ten years, and
Osman before him twenty years. As the famous traveller was an honoured
guest in the palace of Orkhan, where Orkhan’s wife was living at the
time, and where the emir himself came for a few days during the forty
days which Ibn Batutah spent in Nicaea, his testimony is certainly
worthy of credence.[113]

That Nicaea, while preserving its admirable fortifications, should have
decreased so rapidly in importance and population during the seventy
years between the return of the Byzantine emperors to Constantinople and
the Ottoman occupation, is explainable only by three suppositions: that
a majority of the inhabitants had died off, that they had emigrated, or
that they had gradually joined their fortunes with the people of Osman.
We find in Byzantine annals no record of a disastrous plague or of a
large emigration of potters and porcelain workers and weavers to the
capital or elsewhere from Nicaea. There was little fighting. The
Osmanlis had not yet learned to massacre. What are we to believe, then,
concerning the large population of this so recently flourishing city?

It is hardly a conjecture to affirm that the Nicaeans must have cast
their fortunes with that steadily growing band whose firm conviction,
forced upon them against their will and in violence to centuries-old
traditions and sentiments, was that the old structure of society could
not be repaired, and that there must be an entirely new building upon
the old foundation. This conviction did not come suddenly or to all at
once. It was a gradual dawning and awakening which caused the ranks of
the Osmanlis to become greater every year. Before the end of Orkhan’s
reign the nucleus of Asiatic adventurers which had gathered around Osman
in the little village of Sugut had grown to half a million. It could not
have been by natural increase. It could not have been by the flocking in
of nomads from the East. Orkhan was cut off from contact with the
Asiatic hinterland. His rivals of Karaman, Satalia, Aïdin, and Sarukhan
would have attracted adventurers from the outside before himself. Orkhan
formed his nation out of the elements on the ground. These were mostly
Greek. Nicaea is but an illustration of the way in which the new race
was born and the new nation formed.

This conviction that no good could come from Constantinople went farther
than a transference of allegiance from the Palaeologi to the family of
Osman. Mohammed was substituted for Christ. What a momentous
significance there is in the records of the Greek Orthodox Church that
in 1339 and again in 1340 the Patriarch sent an impassioned appeal to
the Nicaeans that they should not abjure the Christian faith![114] At
that very moment when the ecclesiastics of Constantinople were espousing
the rival claims of unworthy aspirants to the imperial purple and were
anathematizing each other in supporting trivial theological arguments,
Christians were adopting the new Credo: ‘I believe in one God, and
Mohammed is his prophet!’ in the city of the Nicene Creed.

We may place the surrender of Nicomedia in 1337 or 1338.[115] This was
the last Byzantine possession in the Ottoman corner of Asia Minor. The
fall of Aïdos and Semendria on the hills behind Scutari had opened the
way to the Bosphorus. Yalova, renowned for its baths, and Hereké, where
Constantine the Great died, gave the Osmanlis undisputed control of the
entrance to the Gulf of Nicomedia and secure possession of the city
where Diocletian had made a new capital for the Roman Empire.


IV

Orkhan had now accomplished the first part of the great task left
unfinished by Osman. But, before he could proceed to the establishment
of laws for his new state, it was necessary for him to consolidate and
strengthen his position in relation to his formidable neighbours.
Dangers threatened from the east and from the south. In 1327 Timurtash,
a son of Choban, who was Mongol governor of Rum, pushed his raids as far
as the Mediterranean, which the Mongol arms had not hitherto reached. He
fought in turn Greeks and Turks.[116] Fortunately for Orkhan, the emir
of Kermian, whose capital was Kutayia, had appeared so unpromising to
the eyes of Timurtash that the Mongols had not come northward. But they
were an ever imminent source of danger to the emirs of Asia Minor, and
to Orkhan among them, until 1335, when the death of Bahadur Khan, just
the year before the birth of Timur, caused the disintegration of the
Mongol power in western Asia.[117]

The Mongol menace had contributed to the undisturbed operations of
Orkhan against the Byzantines. Immediately upon its removal he was
threatened by the other Turkish emirs. It was a critical moment for
Orkhan, whose territories had not yet reached the proportions of a large
state, like those of Omar of Aïdin and Mohammed of Sarukhan. Singly they
might have crushed Orkhan. United they certainly would have done so. But
here again the Byzantines contributed to their own downfall.

In 1329, at Phocaea, Andronicus had conducted his first negotiations
with the emirs of Aïdin and Sarukhan.[118] This unsuccessful attempt to
embroil the Anatolian emirs with each other was a pitiful confession of
weakness on the part of Andronicus. It did no harm to Orkhan. But it
called the attention of these emirs to the impotence of Andronicus, and
led to a series of petty raids in Macedonia and Thrace. Emboldened by
the ease of initial successes, Mohammed of Sarukhan in 1333 led in
person an expedition of seventy-five ships against the Macedonian coast.
Andronicus was too weak to oppose his landing.[119] In the same year
Turkish pirates seized for a short time Rodosto, on the Sea of Marmora,
only a few hours’ sail from Constantinople.[120] The following year the
emperor was compelled to put an army in the field to save Salonika from
the Turks.[121]

These attentions from his proposed allies did not prevent Andronicus
from seeking aid in the same quarters in 1336 when he was besieging the
Genoese of Phocaea. Mohammed sent twenty-four ships, numerous troops,
and all the provisions necessary to sustain the imperial army. The net
gain to Andronicus from this expedition was the empty acknowledgement
from Cattaneo of Phocaea, who was not afraid of Andronicus but did not
want to be bothered by him and his Turkish allies, that he would hold as
a ‘fief of the empire’ what Andronicus, even with the help of the Turks,
could not take from him![122]

This momentary diversion of the attention and energies of his neighbours
was most propitious for Orkhan. Andronicus had rendered him good
service. It gave to Orkhan an opportunity of enlarging and rounding out
his dominions without incurring opposition that would not only have
prevented him from carrying out his schemes but might also have
destroyed him. Orkhan had been waiting for this moment. In 1333, the
Turcoman emir of Mysia had died. His younger son had taken refuge with
Orkhan, and promised in return for aid in dispossessing his brother to
surrender to the Osmanlis Balikesri and three other border cities.
Orkhan could not act immediately. He contented himself with advising the
elder brother to divide his dominions with Tursun. Tursun went to
negotiate in person, and was killed by his brother. This was shortly
before the expedition to Phocaea. Orkhan was now ready. He put in the
field an expedition, ostensibly to punish the assassination of his
protégé Tursun, and was so successful that he forced the emir of Karasi
to give up Pergamos and go into exile in Brusa.[123] In another
expedition, which probably occurred in

[Illustration: THE EMIRATES OF OSMAN AND ORKHAN]

1337 at the earliest,[124] Orkhan added Mikhalitsch, Ulubad, and
Kermasti to his dominions. He was now virtually master of Mysia.

This was the extent of Orkhan’s conquests in Asia Minor. It is necessary
to emphasize this point, owing to the erroneous idea which has so long
been accepted and which has found its way into many modern writers.[125]
No corroboration can be found for the statement of Cantacuzenos that
Soleiman captured Angora from the Tartars in 1354.[126] Aside from this,
neither Byzantines nor Osmanlis report any further conquests of Orkhan
in Asia Minor. From the fact that there is a complete silence as to
their fate, it is reasonable to suppose that the Osmanlis during the
last decade of Orkhan’s reign destroyed the independence of several
little states of which Ibn Batutah and Shehabeddin report the existence
between 1334 and 1349.[127] But these were all in a general sense either
included in Mysia (Karasi) or in the territory which Orkhan is popularly
supposed to have inherited from Osman.[128]

After the Mysian expedition and the fall of Nicomedia, Orkhan may be
regarded as the acknowledged sovereign of a definite state. We have good
contemporary testimony to his character, his power and his reputation at
this period just before he became an active factor in deciding the
destinies of the Byzantine Empire.

Ibn Batutah calls him the ‘lord of Brusa, son of Osman the Little,
powerful and rich among the Turcoman kings, in treasures, cities and
soldiers’. He never ceased making the tour of the hundred castles he
possessed. In each of these he would pass several days to repair them
and inspect their situation. It was common report that he never spent a
whole month in a city, not even in Brusa. He was all the time fighting
and besieging the infidels. It was his indomitable energy which seems to
have impressed the traveller from Morocco. The absolute lack of
slothful, indifferent acquiescence in the will of God of these
latter-day Turkish converts was naturally a source of continual surprise
to this doctor of Islam, fresh from his observation of races who had
been for hundreds of years in the faith of Mohammed.[129]

Shehabeddin is less complimentary. He says: ‘Orkhan has under his
domination fifty cities and a still larger number of castles. His army
consists of 40,000 horsemen, and an almost innumerable host of
foot-soldiers. But these troops are not warlike, and their number is
more formidable in appearance than in reality. This prince shows himself
very pacific in regard to his neighbours, and always ready to help his
allies. However, he is engaged in continual wars and is always at odds
with many enemies. If he gains little from these struggles, it is
because his soldiers do not serve him well, his subjects are not well
disposed towards him, and several of his neighbours live in open
hostility to him. I am told that the Osmanlis are treacherous men, whose
hearts know only hatred and whose heads are filled with base
thoughts.’[130] In another place Shehabeddin records that Orkhan has in
the field 25,000 horsemen who are fighting daily the prince of
Constantinople. ‘The Greek emperor is eager to buy the goodwill of
Orkhan by paying him a monthly tribute.’ Orkhan sends expeditions into
Europe, ‘where waves of blood flow’.[131]


V

The first Ottoman legislation, and the organization of the army, is
attributed by tradition to Orkhan’s brother, Alaeddin, rather than to
the emir himself. The story goes that Alaeddin was a man of peace, and
did not engage in war.[132] He refused to accept the generous offer of
Orkhan to share the states of Osman, when their father died. Not only
would he not accept a division of the chieftainship, but he also refused
to share the personal possessions of Osman. Then Orkhan said, ‘Since you
will not rule, be my vizier, and bear the burdens of the organization of
the state.’ Thus was created the office of Grand Vizier, which has
played so important a part in Ottoman history.[133]

In the various lists, which were compiled at a much later date, Alaeddin
is given as the first Grand Vizier. That this office, in its accepted
form, was created during the reign of Orkhan is altogether improbable.
The story of the affectionate relationship between Orkhan and Alaeddin,
and the sharing of duties by them, is, like the story of Ertogrul’s
receiving the promise after reading the Koran, a reminiscence of
patriarchal days. The dream with its promise harks back to Jacob and the
ladder.[134] The relation between Orkhan and Alaeddin reminds one too
strongly of Moses and Aaron to be accepted without reserve. One has only
to turn to the twentieth Sura of the Koran to find the connexion and the
suggestion: ‘And Moses answered, Lord, give me a vizier of my family,
Aaron, my brother. Gird up my loins by him, and make him my colleague in
the business: that we may praise thee greatly, and remember thee often;
for thou regardest us.’[135]

What a contrast between this idyllic story of Orkhan and Alaeddin, and
the killing of Yakub by Bayezid on the battlefield of Kossova fifty
years later!

Alaeddin was also the first Osmanli to receive the title of pasha. He is
always spoken of as Alaeddin pasha. This same title was conferred on
Soleiman, the eldest son of Orkhan. The oldest son of Murad proving a
traitor, and there being no other son mature enough, Murad transferred
the title to Kara Khalil. This word, which came from the Persian, was
thus early deflected by the Ottoman sovereigns from its original
significance, the title of the eldest son of the ruler.[136] It soon
came to be bestowed upon high military and civil dignitaries. Similarly,
the rank of vizier passed immediately out of the imperial family.

That Alaeddin could have accomplished the work attributed to him by the
Ottoman historians, the making of laws and the organization of the army,
is impossible for three reasons. The time for this great work was too
short and not a propitious period: Alaeddin died seven years after his
father, in 1333,[137] before Orkhan was firmly established in his
sovereignty; the statement is incompatible with what we know of the
character of Orkhan; finally, the organization of the state and of the
army must have been the result of a slow development through many years,
and its perfection belongs to the middle or latter part of Orkhan’s
career, years after Alaeddin pasha’s death.

The whole scheme of an Islamic state is theocratic. Its laws, its
customs are founded directly upon the Koran and the interpretation of
the Koran by the early ‘fathers’ of Mohammedanism. There is no civil law
as distinct from ecclesiastical law.[138] The judges and the lawyers
belong to the clergy. Orkhan’s problem was exceedingly difficult.
Whether they were Turkish converts or Greek renegades, the Osmanlis were
all on common ground in their entire ignorance of the art of building a
Moslem state. It is idle to speculate upon the early legislation of the
Osmanlis, for there are no records. But it is probable that the Osmanlis
did not at this early time make any attempt to establish a body of laws
in conformity with the Koran. Where the _Sheri’at_ (the sacred law) was
understood, and where it was applicable to local conditions, it was
naturally used. But, side by side with the sacred Moslem law, existed
the old Byzantine code. This was used by the Osmanlis until they were
firmly seated in Constantinople. Only then did they acquire a complete
system of Moslem canon law. It is within the scope of a work covering a
later period than that included in this volume to point out the strong
Byzantine and moderate Turkish influences in the _Kanunnamé_ of Mohammed
the Conqueror.


VI

For dealing with Ottoman subjects and with those who might be conquered
in war, certain principles were, however, adopted by the Osmanlis in the
time of Orkhan. The foremost of these was complete religious toleration.
This made possible, to a large measure it explains, the development of
the Osmanlis into a powerful empire.

The propagation of Islam by the sword under the early Khalifs, the
sudden and unparalleled spread of the new religion from the Arabian
desert to Syria, Egypt, North Africa, and Spain, until the hordes of the
invaders were stopped by Charles Martel at Tours, the terrible ravages
of the Moslem corsairs in the Mediterranean--here were the sources of
the deep impression of fanaticism and cruelty that the rise of Islam and
the followers of Mohammed had made upon an equally fanatical and cruel
Europe. That the recrudescence of the Islamic movement under the
Osmanlis was represented in the same colours by the early European
writers is explicable when we consider their lack of unbiased
information and their confusion of the Osmanlis with the Asiatic
conquerors, such as Attila and the Huns, Djenghiz Khan and the Mongols,
Timur and the Tartars. We must take into account, too, the fact that
these historians wrote at a time when the Osmanlis were beginning to be
perverted by fanatical Arab influences, and were a real menace to the
peace of Europe. From the fifteenth to the seventeenth century, ‘the
Turk’ was a monster of iniquity and cruelty, from whom even the distant
English in the security of their island home prayed to be
delivered.[139] The recent history of the Ottoman Empire has
unfortunately contributed much to keep alive this impression.

In spite of the accumulated evidence which on the surface points to a
contrary conclusion, the Osmanli is not and never has been a religious
fanatic like the Arab Moslem.[140] He is not by nature zealous or
enthusiastic, nor is he by nature cruel. Docile, tractable, gentle, in a
word, lovable--this is the verdict of the traveller who has had an
opportunity of knowing that portion of the Moslem population of the
Ottoman Empire which is popularly called Turkish. Other influences of
their religion than hatred for the Christian have prevented the Osmanlis
from winning and keeping a place among the civilized peoples of the
world. Whatever one may claim in abstract theory for the Koran and the
whole body of Moslem teaching, its practical concrete results have been
ignorance, stagnation, immorality, subserviency of womanhood,
indifference, paralysis of the will, absence of incentive to altruism.
These are the causes of the irremediable decay of every Mohammedan
empire, of every Mohammedan people.

The government and the ruling classes of the Ottoman Empire are
negatively rather than positively evil. There is nothing inherently bad
about the Osmanli. He is inert, and has thus failed to reach the
standards set by the progress of civilization. He lacks ideals, and has
thus shocked the enlightened conscience of the modern world. By the law
of the survival of the fittest, he has been cast aside.

But when we compare the early Osmanlis with the Byzantines and with the
other elements in the Balkan peninsula, it is the Osmanlis who must be
pronounced the fittest. They were fresh, enthusiastic, uncontaminated,
energetic. They had ideals: they had a goal. As it is with the
individual, so it is with the nation. Ideals are lost when the goal is
reached. Decay sets in when the struggle for existence ceases.

Pressed on the one side by his Turkish neighbours and on the other by
the danger of including in his dominions a large and unassimilated mass
of Christians, Orkhan was wise enough to desist from any attempt at
forcible conversion. But some _modus vivendi_ had to be arranged. A mere
raider would have massacred and destroyed, and the empire he built
would not have outlived the century of its birth. Orkhan was neither
raider nor invader. He lived in the country of his father and of his
grandfather. Many of his lieutenants--certainly his ablest
ones[141]--were descendants of the oldest stock in Asia Minor. His
nation, if it was to be a nation, depended upon at least a partial
assimilation of the Byzantines. As his dominions increased, it became
clear that there had to be some distinction between Moslem and Christian
other than a profession of faith. He must devise some reward, which
would be so attractive that the Christians, especially the higher
classes among them, would change their faith in order to secure its
benefits. This was the problem.

Orkhan solved this problem by establishing a system of rewards for
military service, and then by restricting military service to Moslems.
He divided the land he had conquered among his faithful warriors, and
let it be known that in future conquests a large portion of the
territory won, outside of the cities, would be bestowed upon soldiers
who took part in his campaigns. These lands were to be held as military
fiefs. The only obligation was that of military service, which could be
performed either by actually putting into the field a number of men in
proportion to the land held or by paying a sum sufficient to replace the
quota by hired troops. So far this was but an adaptation of the European
feudal system. But it was superior to the European system in that the
holdings were small and that there was through two centuries an
ever-present opportunity of winning new holdings.

Except in Albania and Bosnia, where the old nobility were to preserve
their lands by conversion to Islam, there were no local traditions to
prevent such a scheme by necessitating the dispossession of former great
landowners. The Seljuks, the Crusaders, and the Mongols in Asia Minor,
the Catalans, the Bulgarians, the Serbians and the civil wars between
the emperors in Macedonia and Thrace, the hangers-on of the Fourth
Crusade in Thessaly, Greece, and the Aegaean Islands, had made so clean
a sweep of the old aristocracy, attached to the soil, that Orkhan’s idea
was feasible. Through these small holdings and through the rapid
increase of conquered territory, the Ottoman sultans were able, almost
from the beginning, to exercise an absolute sovereignty over their
expanding dominions, and to prevent the rise of a class of nobles. The
Ottoman Empire has never known an hereditary nobility. In the later
conquests, the Sublime Porte sometimes granted life rights of
governorship, with a tacit understanding that the succession should go
to the son, to local chieftains or to large landowners. But these
concessions were in regions never fully conquered, and remote from
Constantinople. Those to whom these privileges were given had no part in
the central government and no rank outside of their immediate locality.

In place of military service, every adult Christian paid a special
head-tax, to be used for the support of the army. The Christian was
exempt from military service; the Mussulman was exempt from taxes.[142]
This head-tax was heavy, and so gauged as to keep the Christian, unless
he lived in a city, in economic dependence upon the Moslem landowner. As
a general rule, during the first century and a half of Ottoman conquest,
those who held to the old faith went to the cities and large towns. The
Moslem thus became, without any attempt at forcible conversion or need
to massacre, the undisputed possessor of the country districts.

Aside from the onerous head-tax, there were grave inequalities for the
Christian in matters of law and in intermarriage. After the fall of
Constantinople, Mohammed the Conqueror gave the Christians a large
measure of self-government by putting them in _millets_ (nations) under
the headship of the ecclesiastical authorities. But the inequality in
the matter of intermarriage has never been done away with. A Moslem may
marry a Christian woman, but a Christian is forbidden to marry a
Mohammedan woman. In the earliest days, when there was neither racial
nor religious antipathy and Christian and Moslem lived in close social
intercourse, this law was a powerful proselytizing agency. It furnished
a temptation to a change of faith which, whenever it arose, was far
stronger than the temptation of lands, of power, of economic
independence, or of civil equality.

The moment one professed Islam he became an Osmanli. Religion has always
been the test of nationality in the Ottoman Empire.[143] The Osmanlis
increased from the thousands to the millions, in Macedonia, in Thrace,
and in Asia Minor. Ancestry was quickly forgotten in the midst of
ever-changing conditions and the founding of a new social order. It is
still a characteristic of the Osmanli that he has no surname. The most
widely-read English writer of the seventeenth century on the ‘Turks’
emphasized the mixture of blood in the Osmanli, when he wrote: ‘At
present the blood of the Turks is so mixed with that of all sorts of
Languages and Nations, that none of them can derive his Lineage from
the ancient blood of the Saracens.’[144]

A majority of the Byzantines whom Orkhan, Murad, and Bayezid conquered
must have become Osmanlis. Once the change of religion was made, the
development of the new race was not difficult. There was much in common
between the Turk of Asia Minor and the Byzantine. An Armenian
contemporary wrote of them as if they were alike.[145] The Greeks did
not take to heart the new régime,[146] for the fiscal evils of the
Byzantine system reconciled them in advance to a change. Nothing could
be worse than that which they had suffered.[147]

Of course, the love of woman, the desire for adventure, hope of economic
independence through rewards of land and removal of onerous taxes,
disgust with the Byzantine administration and with the lack of support
from their rulers and ecclesiastical authorities--these influences did
not cause the conversion of all the Christians. In the cities, where the
inequality and the inconvenience of remaining true to the old faith was
minimized, and where Christianity has always been able to make itself
felt and heard,[148] there was no great temptation to a change of
religion. After the Osmanlis became stronger, and entered into the
aggressive period of conquest, they resorted to other means to swell
their numbers. The institution of the Janissaries, and the permission to
enslave those whom they conquered, gave the Osmanlis more potent and
immediately pressing arguments.

From the completion of the conquest of Bithynia by Orkhan, the Osmanlis
can be called a distinct race with a national consciousness and a desire
for expansion. They can be distinguished from the Turks of the emirates
of Asia Minor and from the Byzantines. The Turk did not absorb the
Greek, nor did the Greek absorb the Turk. Both had taken a new religion,
and if the Turkish language was adopted, it was rather the customs and
laws of the Byzantines which prevailed until the influence of the Arabs,
enhanced as it was with the prestige of centuries of Islam, gained the
ascendancy over Turkish and Byzantine tradition alike. But this did not
occur until the Osmanlis invaded Syria, Egypt, and Mesopotamia at the
beginning of the sixteenth century.

It must be remembered that the Greeks were not the only element added to
the Turkish stock. The adoption of the Turkish language by the Osmanlis
was due not only to the fact that from the beginning it was the military
and governmental language, but to its being the simplest and most
vigorous medium of communication for the different peoples who became
Osmanlis.

Calling the Osmanlis Turks, and regarding them as invaders upon the soil
of Europe, is an historical error which has persisted so long that the
Osmanlis themselves have fallen into it! They have always distinguished
themselves from the Turks. This is proved by their own use of that word
to describe a people as different from themselves as were the Greeks.
Evliya effendi spoke of the ‘harsh language of the Turks’, and said of
Turbeli Koïlik, which was conquered by Osman in 1312, ‘Though its
inhabitants are Turks, it is a sweet town.’[149] Hadji Khalfa regarded
the Turks as synonymous with the Tartars, and an altogether foreign
race.[150]

Whether their tolerance was actuated by policy, by genuine kindly
feeling, or by indifference,[151] the fact cannot be gainsaid that the
Osmanlis were the first nation in modern history to lay down the
principle of religious freedom as the corner-stone in the building up of
their nation. During the centuries that bear the stain of unremitting
persecution of the Jew and the responsibility for official support of
the Inquisition, Christian and Moslem lived together in harmony under
the rule of the Osmanlis. This was generally, though not universally,
the case throughout the fourteenth century in the Turkish emirates of
Asia Minor.[152]


VII

The army of Osman consisted entirely of volunteer horsemen, who were
called _akindjis_. They wore no specified uniform. But they were superb
riders and moved together ‘like a wall’--an expression that has come
down to the present day in Ottoman military drills.[153] When Osman
planned a campaign, he sent criers into the villages to proclaim that
‘whoever wanted to fight’ should be at a certain place on a certain day.

Orkhan was the organizer of the Ottoman army. He and his successor
Murad laid the foundations of a military power which was without rival
for two centuries. Although there is no ground for the claim of many
historians that the Osmanlis were a hundred years ahead of Europe in
organizing a standing army,[154] they were certainly pioneers in the
complete organization of an army on a permanent war footing. Orkhan
understood well the principle _qui se laisse payer se laisse commander_
thirty years before Charles V of France.

His irregular infantry (_azabs_) were placed in the front when battle
was engaged.[155] It made little difference how many of these were
killed, or whether they made a good show. They served to draw the first
fire of the enemy. When the enemy’s energy was exhausted or when he was
led to pursue the fleeing azabs, thinking the victory his, he came upon
the second line, which consisted of paid, disciplined troops. These were
accustomed to fighting together, were acquainted with their leaders’
commands and strategy, and had a tremendous advantage over the usual
mercenaries of the period in that they served a cause to which their
lives were devoted and a sovereign whose interests were identical with
their own. Whether this were due to training begun in the days of
adolescence, or to the knowledge that bravery would be rewarded not by
booty alone (always an uncertain quantity which the ordinary mercenary
invariably begins to think of securing before his fighting work is
really accomplished), but by promotion in the service and substantial
gifts of land, the result was the same.

The corps of salaried soldiers were called Kapu-Kali Odjaks, and their
service was centred in the person of their sovereign. They were supposed
to be continually ‘at the door of the Sultan’s tent’. The Sultan paid
them regularly and personally. They served him regularly and personally.
When they went into the field with a commander other than the Sultan,
the commander was regarded, during the term of his commission, as in the
place of the Sultan.[156] There came to be seven of these _odjaks_: the
_janissaries_, the _adjami-oghlular_ (novices), the _topjis_
(field-artillerymen), the _djebedjis_ (smiths), the _toparabadjis_
(artillery and munition drivers), the _khumbaradjis_
(siege-artillerymen), and the _sakkas_ (water-carriers).[157] It is
impossible to state just when these distinctive corps arose, but they
are the logical development of Orkhan’s _Eulufeli_, the year-in and
year-out soldiery who followed arms as a definite profession and enjoyed
a regular salary fixed by law.

The _akindjis_, cavalry scouts and yet more than that, served as an
advance-guard, and opened up the country to be conquered. The greatest
dangers and the richest rewards fell to them. They were recruited from
among the holders of military fiefs (_timarets_). Guides (tchaousches)
and regular paid corps of cavalry (_spahis_) completed the organization.

It may be that Orkhan had learned a valuable lesson from his observation
of the Catalans and of the early Turkish invaders in Europe. For he
arranged his organization in such a way that the army would depend
directly upon him, and not upon subordinates who might be led to put
their personal interests above those of their chief. With the exception
of the _akindjis_, whose loyalty was secured by their fiefs, there were
no irregular bands raised and led by adventurers. Unity was the first
striking characteristic of the Ottoman army.

The second characteristic was readiness. We have already seen how
Andronicus III ‘gathered in haste’ the army which he tried to oppose to
the Osmanlis. Lack of time for preparation is the excuse for many a
Byzantine disaster. An early and competent traveller wrote that the
Osmanlis knew beforehand just when the Christian armies were coming and
where they could be met to the best advantage. For they were always on a
war footing, and their _tchaousches_ and spies knew how and where to
lead. ‘They can start suddenly, and a hundred Christian soldiers would
make more noise than ten thousand Osmanlis. When the drum is sounded
they put themselves immediately in march, never breaking step, never
stopping till the word is given. Lightly armed, in one night they travel
as far as their Christian adversaries in three days.’[158]


VIII

The fall of Brusa, Nicaea, and Nicomedia did not cause alarm in Europe.
The rise of the Osmanlis had scarcely been noticed, even by the
Byzantines! The Turkish pirates in the Aegaean, who had no connexion
whatever with the Osmanlis,[159] were becoming, however, a menace to the
commerce of the Venetians and Genoese and to the sovereignty of the
remaining Latin princes of Achaia and of the islands. In one of Marino
Sanudo’s letters we find the following significant passage: ‘Marco
Gradenigo, writing to me from Negropont (Euboea) on September
eighteenth, 1328, declares that unless some remedy be found against the
Turks, who have marvellously increased in numbers, Negropont and all
the islands of the Archipelago will be infallibly lost.’[160]

In 1327 Andronicus II wrote to Pope John XXII, calling his attention to
the Turks as a danger to Christendom, and appealing for aid.[161]
Nothing was done at this time. The Byzantines were schismatics, and
France at least was more intent upon a recovery of the Holy Land than
upon checking the advance of the Moslem corsairs.[162]

Andronicus III, in 1333, followed the example of his grandfather by
making another overture to John XXII. He did not scruple to dangle
before the Pope the bait of a reunion of the Churches.[163] The same
year Venice urged Cyprus and Rhodes to join in a coalition against the
Turks.[164] The only practical outcome of the efforts of the popes, the
Venetian senate, and the Byzantine emperors to raise a crusade during
the reign of Orkhan was the capture of Smyrna, in October 1344. Omar
bey, emir of Aïdin, had been caught napping.[165] Smyrna remained in
possession of the Knights of Rhodes until it was taken by Timur in
1403.[166]

The futile agitation in Europe against the reawakening of Islam did not
in any way hurt Orkhan. On the contrary it helped him greatly. Just as
the petty conflict of Andronicus III with Phocaea in 1336 had diverted
Orkhan’s powerful southern neighbours, this interference of the Pope,
and the activity of Rhodes and Venice, contributed to the prosperity and
growth of the Osmanlis by striking a blow at his most dangerous rivals,
the Emirs of Sarukhan, Aïdin, and Hamid. After 1340 Orkhan was ready to
extend his dominion into Europe. He did not have long to wait.


IX

Orkhan had one rival whose goal was similar to his own. Stephen Dushan,
kral of Serbia, was openly aspiring to the imperial throne. Byzantium
had no more formidable enemy than this warrior king, who in twenty-five
years led thirteen campaigns against the Greeks.[167] The memory of his
ephemeral empire has been cherished by the Serbians to this day. In
their folk-lore Stephen Dushan and his deeds are immortalized. The halo
of romance still surrounds the man and his conquests. It is in vain that
historical science has demonstrated the purely temporary character of
Stephen’s conquests. It is in vain that he has been divested of the
glamour of the chronicles and songs, and pictured in conformity with
fact. To the Serbian peasant he is Saint Stephen, the glorious Czar, who
brought the Serbian Empire to its zenith. All the cities in which this
adventurer and raider set foot are claimed in the twentieth century as a
legitimate part of ‘Greater Serbia’. Men have engaged in a bloody war
and have died for this fiction.[168]

Stephen Dushan demands our attention because he is the one man who could
have anticipated the Osmanlis in winning the inheritance of the Caesars.
A statement of his career is necessary before we take up the narration
of the events which led to the invasion of the Balkan peninsula by the
Osmanlis.

Stephen came into prominence in 1330 during the war which his father,
Urosh, made upon Bulgaria. Czar Michael had repudiated the Serbian
princess Anna in order to marry a sister of Andronicus III. The
Bulgarians were badly beaten. Stephen received for his brilliant part in
the campaign the province of Zenta. Although he was only twenty-three,
his ambition to rule was already awakened. Dissatisfied, he demanded a
half of his father’s possessions. Urosh refused. Stephen marched against
him, dethroned him, and imprisoned him. According to some authorities,
he had Urosh killed.[169] Whether he actually ordered the assassination
or not, he profited by the crime.

During the first decade of his reign, Stephen gathered a majority of the
Serbian-speaking peoples under his rule, pushed down to the Dalmatian
coast, and asserted Serbian supremacy over a large portion of the
territory which his race had hitherto contested with the Bulgarians. His
appearance on the Adriatic led to a nominal alliance with Venice.[170]
In 1340 he began the invasion of lower Macedonia. When the valley of the
Vardar was conquered, he attacked Serres. This city fell into his
possession. He now considered himself ready for the advance on
Constantinople. Drunk with success, he crowned himself at Serres[171]
‘King by the grace of God of Serbia, of Albania, and of the maritime
region, prince of the Bulgarian empire, and master of almost all the
Roman empire’.[172] A few months later he changed the title to ‘emperor
and autocrat of Serbia and Romania’.[173]

The relations between Stephen and Venice during the period between 1345
and 1350 show how easily an alliance between the Serbians and the
Venetians might have been concluded. It was a critical time for Orkhan.
Had Stephen Dushan, with the help of the Venetians, attacked
Constantinople before 1350, the Osmanlis would have lost their goal.
After his coronation, the ‘Roman emperor’ sent an embassy to Venice to
secure the Senate’s aid for the definite purpose of acquiring
Constantinople.[174] In 1347 the Senate, in response to a second
overture, congratulated Stephen on having been crowned ‘emperor of
Constantinople’, but regretted the impossibility of aiding him. There
was a truce between Venice and the Byzantine Empire, and they were at
that moment engaged in a war with Zara.[175] However, like typical
merchants, they consented to sell arms to Stephen.[176]

In January 1348 the Senate congratulated Stephen upon his exploits,[177]
and later in the same year granted him three, then four, galleys.[178]
This seems to be the extent of the help rendered by Venice to Stephen
Dushan. The success of Stephen in subjugating Thessaly, and his progress
farther south until, in 1349, the Serbian flags waved on the mainland
opposite the Venetian castle of Ptelion in Euboea, alarmed the
Venetians. The Senate complained of the piracy of the Serbians in the
Aegaean, and tried to re-establish peace between Serbians and
Greeks.[179] Stephen became more insistent and the Senate more
reluctant. On April 13, 1350, the Senate considered several demands made
upon them by an envoy of ‘Stephen Dushan, emperor of Serbia and Romania,
despot of Arta and count of Wallachia’. Among them were Venetian
citizenship for himself, his wife and his son, a conference with the
Doge at Ragusa, and substantial aid for the attack upon Constantinople,
‘when he shall have conquered the ten parts of Romania outside of
Constantinople.’[180] The chart of citizenship was accorded. But he was
informed that the Doge never left Venice during his tenure of office,
and that there was a treaty of friendship with the Byzantines which
prevented Venice from joining in an attempt to capture the imperial
city.[181]

Convinced that he could expect no substantial assistance from Venice,
Stephen planned to work the old trick of the Byzantine emperors. The
Serbians were already excommunicated by the Greek Orthodox Church.
Stephen negotiated with the Pope for the return of the Serbians into the
Roman fold.[182]

When war arose between Venice and Genoa, Stephen sent envoys to Orkhan
to propose a union of the Serbian and Ottoman armies for a campaign
against Constantinople. The marriage of his daughter to Orkhan’s son
was to seal the alliance. Orkhan accepted this proposal. An embassy was
immediately sent to Stephen to arrange the details of the alliance. But
Cantacuzenos determined to prevent this change of Orkhan’s allegiance by
a most drastic measure. He did not fear the anger of Orkhan as greatly
as he feared a union between Orkhan and Dushan. The Ottoman envoys were
ambushed. Some were killed. Those who escaped, together with the
presents destined for Stephen, were taken to Demotika.[183]

Neither Stephen nor Orkhan tried to reopen the negotiations. They
realized that their ambitions were too nearly identical to permit a
harmonious agreement as to a division of the spoils. Macedonia was as
hard to divide in the fourteenth century as it is in the twentieth.
After 1351 Stephen watched to see what effect the war between Venice and
Genoa was going to have upon his fortunes. He also intrigued, as Orkhan
was doing, in the civil war of the Byzantines. These were his Capuan
days. They were fatal to the fame of Stephen--outside of the Serbian
folk-lore! The first expedition of Orkhan’s son Soleiman, in 1353, so
alarmed Stephen that he tried to become reconciled to the Orthodox
Church. He sent an embassy to Constantinople, but the patriarch refused
his blessing until Stephen had renounced the title of emperor and his
conquests east of the Vardar.[184] Stephen could not do this. Nor could
he wait longer. If he did not strike quickly, the Osmanlis would be in
his path. He took what was now a gambler’s chance. With eighty thousand
men he started for Constantinople. Death claimed him on the second day
of the march.[185] The Serbian Empire did not outlive its founder.


X

The public life of John Cantacuzenos was contemporary almost to the year
with that of Stephen Dushan. He was associated with Andronicus III in
the capacity of grand chancellor and confidential adviser throughout the
decade which saw the loss of Nicaea and Nicomedia. Shortly after he had
succeeded in deposing his grandfather, Andronicus III was taken with a
violent fever. His crime-stained mind could not rid itself of the idea
that he was going to die, even after he had become convalescent. He
solicited Cantacuzenos to assume the imperial purple. He wanted to
abdicate and take monk’s orders. A drink from a miraculous spring gave
him a new grip on life.[186] For eleven years he lived on, in every
crisis irresolute, in every disaster unkingly, bending always before the
stronger will of Cantacuzenos. In 1341, at the early age of forty-five,
his worthless life ended. His legacy to the Empress Anna and his child
heir was the guardianship of his ‘friend and counsellor, John
Cantacuzenos’. The grand chancellor accepted the regency with
alacrity.[187]

Three months after the death of Andronicus III, Cantacuzenos crowned
himself emperor at Demotika. He put the imperial crown also upon the
head of his wife Irene, a Bulgarian princess. Neither in Constantinople
nor in Adrianople were the pretensions of Cantacuzenos admitted. The
widow of Andronicus, Anna of Savoy, refused to acknowledge the usurper.
In Adrianople the inhabitants called in both Bulgarians and Turks to
defend them against Cantacuzenos.[188] The Bulgarian Czar took sides
secretly against his son-in-law.

The year 1342 saw the Byzantines engaged in another terrible civil war.
The self-appointed emperor did not hesitate to go to Pristina and offer
to Stephen Dushan Macedonia as far as Serres in exchange for Serbian aid
against the Palaeologi.[189]

When the Serbian assistance proved unsatisfactory, Cantacuzenos called
in the Turks of Aïdin. Omar, with 83 ships and 29,000 soldiers, came to
his aid, but, because of the severe cold, returned to Asia before
anything could be accomplished.[190] He came back in the spring of 1343
with 290 vessels and helped Cantacuzenos to enter Salonika. In the fall
of this year Cantacuzenos led his Turkish mercenaries into Thrace. Anna
appealed in vain to Venice to exercise a pressure upon the Turks and
Serbians, so that they would no longer support her rival.[191] In
desperation she gave Alexander of Bulgaria nine strongholds in the
Rhodope Mountains in exchange for a few thousand soldiers. She resorted
also to bribing the Turks in Cantacuzenos’s service, and made overtures
to Orkhan.

The crusade of 1344 against the Turks of Aïdin, which resulted in the
capture of Smyrna, prevented Cantacuzenos from continuing to receive
substantial aid from Omar, who died four years later in an attempt to
win back Smyrna.[192] Stephen Dushan, as we have already seen, was
laying claim to the Byzantine throne himself. Cantacuzenos could turn
only to the Osmanlis.

It was in January 1345 that Cantacuzenos made his infamous proposal to
Orkhan. In exchange for six thousand soldiers he was to give his
daughter Theodora to the Ottoman emir.[193] Orkhan now turned a deaf ear
to the appeals of Anna. This was a better offer. The Osmanlis crossed
into Europe. With their help Cantacuzenos got possession of all the
coast cities of the Black Sea except Sozopolis, besieged Constantinople,
ravaged the neighbourhood of the capital, and won Adrianople.[194]

It was only by threatening to change to the side of the Palaeologi that
Orkhan secured the fulfilment of the bargain. In May 1346 Theodora
became his bride.[195] A few days later, while Cantacuzenos was
besieging the capital with the soldiers for whom he had paid so dearly,
the beleaguered city was awakened by an ominous event. The eastern
portion of the Church of St. Sophia had fallen.[196]

Throughout the year 1346 Constantinople was invested by Cantacuzenos and
his mercenaries. The aristocratic party was almost openly championing
the cause of the usurper, while Anna relied upon the democratic party
and the Genoese. As for the clergy, they and the bulk of the population
were more interested in the ecclesiastical trial of Barlaam for the
Bogomile heresy[197] than in the civil war. In February 1347, while the
Synod was in the act of condemning Barlaam, and Anna was confined to her
bed with a serious illness, partisans of Cantacuzenos left the Golden
Gate open. The ‘faithful friend and counsellor’ of Andronicus III
entered without opposition. The garrison had been bribed, and prevented
the Genoese from coming to the rescue of the empress. She yielded only
when the palace of the Blachernae was attacked.

Anna agreed to recognize Cantacuzenos and Irene as co-rulers, and to a
union of the families by the betrothal of Helen, daughter of
Cantacuzenos, to the young John Palaeologos. John, who was fifteen,
protested against marrying the thirteen-year-old Helen. His mother
overruled his objections. In May the marriage took place in the church
of the Blachernae, as St. Sophia was still in ruins. This ceremony was
followed by the coronation of the two emperors, John Cantacuzenos and
John Palaeologos, and the three empresses, Anna, Irene, and Helen.[198]
Five rulers for the remnant of the Byzantine Empire! At that very moment
in France, the Marquis de Montferrat, heir to the Latin emperors of
Constantinople, was planning with the Pope to drive out both
Cantacuzenos and Palaeologos.[199]

Orkhan was well satisfied with this entering wedge. He was now
son-in-law of one emperor and brother-in-law of the other. His wife
Theodora was granddaughter of the Bulgarian Czar. He had open to him
also a marriage alliance with Stephen Dushan. The gods were first making
mad.

Cantacuzenos was compelled immediately to seek aid again of Orkhan.
While he had been expending his energies against Constantinople, Stephen
Dushan had made great strides in Macedonia. At Scutari, where Orkhan had
come to congratulate his father-in-law upon the happy issue of the
struggle for the imperial purple, Cantacuzenos asked for six thousand
Osmanlis to dislodge the Serbians from the coast cities of Macedonia.
Orkhan sent the soldiers willingly. He must, however, have given them
secret instructions, for after having taken immense booty they returned
to Nicomedia without having captured for Cantacuzenos a single one of
the cities held by Stephen.[200]


XI

It is impossible to believe that Cantacuzenos from this time onwards did
not realize the danger to which he had exposed the state and the noose
into which he had put his neck. The papal archives and the writings of
Cantacuzenos himself reveal the fact that as early as 1347 Cantacuzenos
had appealed to the Pope to unite the western princes in a crusade
against the Osmanlis,[201] that these negotiations were renewed in
1349[202] and 1350,[203] and that in 1353 a last definite appeal was
made to Clement by Cantacuzenos for relief against those whom he had
invited into Europe to fight his battles.[204]

The five years between 1348 and 1353 gave rise to three events which
were fatal to the Byzantine Empire. They made possible the permanent
foothold of the Osmanlis in Europe. A man’s own efforts and a man’s
ability are not the sole factors in his success. Work and genius avail
nothing where opportunity is lacking. Circumstances over which he has no
control contribute largely to the making of a man. Orkhan, at this
culminating stage of his career, when he was ready to lead his people
into the promised land, was aided by the ‘black death’, the war between
Venice and Genoa, and the conflict between John Cantacuzenos and John
Palaeologos.

The ‘black death’ was first heard of in the Euxine ports. It reached
Constantinople in 1347, and spread to Europe the following year. In
Italy it was universal, and lasted three years. From 15 to 20 per cent.
of the total population died.[205] In the maritime cities that had been
in close contact with the East, the duration of the epidemic was longer
and the mortality higher. The moral and economic effect was great
throughout Europe. Men looked with horror upon this inexplicable malady,
which struck down every fifth person. It gave no warning. There were few
recoveries. For years after the last case was recorded there was nervous
fear of its return. Communications with the Levant had been partially
cut off.[206] Full intercourse was not resumed until after Orkhan and
the Osmanlis were rooted in Macedonia and Thrace. Orkhan had no crusade
to fear as long as there lingered in the minds of the European peoples
the memory of this scourge. The bravest and most adventurous were
unwilling to fight the angel of death.

Plagues continued to visit the coast cities of the Balkan peninsula and
Asia Minor from time to time during the rest of the fourteenth and the
first thirty years of the fifteenth century. Between 1348 and 1431, nine
great plagues are recorded.[207] These dates coincide with the most
aggressive period of Ottoman conquest. As the city population was very
largely Greek and Christian, we cannot over-estimate the importance of
these epidemics. They were a valuable auxiliary in enabling the Osmanlis
to advance and assimilate without formidable opposition.

The ‘black death’ had hardly run its course in Italy when the commercial
rivalries of Genoa and Venice culminated in a bitter war, that lasted
for two years, with varying fortunes, until the battle of Lojera in 1353
broke the sea-power of Genoa. After five centuries of independence the
Genoese were compelled to put themselves under the protection of Milan.
The hatred engendered by this struggle is revealed in the archives of
the two republics. They left unturned no stone to destroy each other.
The history of Venice and Genoa during the fourteenth century reads like
that of Sparta and Athens. The scene of the conflict is the same: the
motive, the spirit, and the result are identical. Venice gained no
material advantage from the war. She had long been alive to the menace
of the Osmanlis.[208] She had been warned by Petrarch of the certain
danger which a war with Genoa would entail, whether its outcome were
favourable or unfavourable.[209]

The Ottoman and Byzantine historians are silent concerning the relations
of the Osmanlis with the Genoese during this war. That the Genoese asked
for and received aid from Orkhan is certain. There had been a convention
beforehand between the Osmanlis and the Genoese of Pera.[210] Both
against the Greeks and against the Venetians the assistance of Orkhan
must have been substantial.[211] It was remembered with gratitude forty
years later.[212]

The triumphal entry into Constantinople and the sanction of the Church
upon his imperial office did not end the troubles of Cantacuzenos. The
first to turn against him was his own son Matthew, who also wanted to be
emperor. Cantacuzenos appeased him for a time by giving him a portion of
Thrace. Then the Genoese of Pera, dissatisfied with the lowering of the
customs tariff to other nations, burned the Greek galleys and arsenals,
and attacked Constantinople. Cantacuzenos had to leave a sick-bed at
Demotika to hurry to save the city. The Greek fleet was destroyed by the
Genoese. The army of Cantacuzenos failed in an attack upon Galata. Peace
was concluded only when the unhappy emperor agreed to sell more land on
the Golden Horn to the Genoese, and restore them in the customs tariffs
to their former place as ‘most favoured nation’.[213]

In 1349 Cantacuzenos called again upon Orkhan to send soldiers to him in
Europe. Twenty thousand Ottoman cavaliers, under the command of Matthew,
marched against Salonika, which was on the point of giving itself to
Stephen Dushan. Cantacuzenos, with the young emperor John, went by sea.
Orkhan, as on the last occasion, secretly worked against his
father-in-law. After Cantacuzenos had already sailed, he recalled the
horsemen who were with Matthew. It was fortunate for Cantacuzenos that
he met at Amphipolis a Turkish fleet which was about to land a force of
raiders to ravage the country, and persuaded the commander to join with
him in a demonstration against Salonika. Otherwise the expedition would
have been a fiasco. As it was, Salonika surrendered. The army of
Cantacuzenos ascended the Vardar as far as Uskub, which was
reoccupied.[214]

It would be too wearisome to go into all the details of the civil war
between Cantacuzenos and John Palaeologos. Involved in it are the
intrigues of Stephen Dushan of Serbia and Alexander of Bulgaria, and
the attitude of Venice and Genoa. At first it seemed as if Cantacuzenos
would be crushed. The partisans of Palaeologos besieged Matthew in the
citadel of Adrianople. The Genoese of Galata, in spite of the strong
Venetian fleet whose co-operation, however, with the Greeks was
lukewarm,[215] compelled Cantacuzenos to cede Silivria and Heraclea,
besides increasing their Galata lands.[216] In the fall of 1352 the
Venetians and Bulgarians declared openly for Palaeologos.[217]

In desperation Cantacuzenos fell back for the last time upon the
Osmanlis. He robbed the churches of the capital to pay Orkhan for twenty
thousand soldiers, and promised him a fortress in the Thracian
Chersonese.[218] With this help he recaptured Adrianople, and relieved
Matthew, who was still holding the citadel. The Serbians were beaten by
Orkhan’s eldest son, Soleiman, near Demotika. All of Thrace and most of
Macedonia returned to the allegiance of Cantacuzenos.[219]

In 1353 Cantacuzenos seemed to have recovered all the lost ground, and
to be at the height of his fortunes. John Palaeologos, abandoned by his
partisans, was in exile at Tenedos. An attempt to win back
Constantinople by intrigue failed. Cantacuzenos, now practically sole
ruler, felt that it was time to establish a new imperial line. He had
Matthew proclaimed co-emperor.[220] In his prosperity he forgot about
Orkhan, who had put him where he was, he forgot that he had invited the
Osmanlis into Europe and had shown them the fertile valleys of Macedonia
and Thrace, that their fighting men had passed along the military roads
of the empire under the command of himself and his son, that he had
mustered Ottoman armies under the walls of Salonika, of Adrianople, of
Demotika, and even of Constantinople.


XII

The Ottoman historians place the first invasion of European territory by
the Osmanlis in the year of the Hegira 758 (1356), and state that
Soleiman crossed the Hellespont one moonlight night with three hundred
warriors, and seized the castle of Tzympe, between Gallipoli and the
Aegaean Sea end of the strait.[221] It is represented as a romantic
adventure, prompted by a dream in which Soleiman saw the moonbeams make
a tempting path for him from Asia into Europe.[222] The earlier western
historians give a variety of dates. Some ascribe the first crossing to
Murad.[223] Several claim that the Osmanlis were transported by two
small Genoese merchant ships, and that there were sixty thousand of
them! The Genoese received a ducat per head. All the calamities of the
‘Turks’ were brought upon Europe by the avarice of the Genoese.[224]

We can reject these stories without hesitation, just as we can reject
the date which the Ottoman historians give.[225] The Osmanlis had been
fighting in Europe since 1345. They had come over in large numbers on
different occasions. There is nothing mysterious or romantic about their
first foothold in Europe. In 1352 Cantacuzenos had promised to Orkhan a
fortress in the Thracian Chersonese. Tzympe may have been given to
Soleiman, or it was taken by him when the promise of Cantacuzenos was
not fulfilled. He did not have to cross secretly from Asia. The Ottoman
soldiers were already at home in Europe, and Soleiman had been their
leader in several expeditions.

Shortly after the occupation of Tzympe, one of those earthquakes which
occur so often in the Thracian Chersonese destroyed a portion of the
walls of Gallipoli. This was Soleiman’s opportunity. He occupied the
city, repaired the breaches, and called over from Bithynia the first
colony of Osmanlis. Other colonies followed rapidly, as the soldiers of
Soleiman took Malgara, Bulaïr (the key of the peninsula),[226] and the
European littoral of the Sea of Marmora as far as Rodosto. The
advance-guard of the Osmanlis appeared within a few miles of
Constantinople; and ‘conducted themselves as masters’.[227] This
colonization was so quickly and easily effected that one is led to
believe that these colonists were for the most part renegade Greeks
returning to their former homes.

Cantacuzenos now reaped the full harvest of his policy. The patriarch
Callixtus refused to consecrate Matthew. He reproached Cantacuzenos for
having delivered Christians into the hands of the infidels, and accused
him of having given to Orkhan the money sent by a Russian prince for the
restoration of St. Sophia.[228] Compelled to flee for his life to the
Genoese in Galata, the patriarch decided to declare for Palaeologos.
When Cantacuzenos chose a new patriarch, Philotheus, who consented as
price of office to consecrate Matthew, Callixtus excommunicated him.
Philotheus returned the compliment. Then Callixtus sailed for Tenedos to
join John Palaeologos.[229]

Cantacuzenos, feeling the precariousness of his position at
Constantinople just at the moment when he thought he had triumphed over
every obstacle to his ambition, bitterly reproached Orkhan for not
having kept faith with him. He offered to buy back Tzympe for ten
thousand ducats, and asked Orkhan to order the Osmanlis to leave
Gallipoli. Orkhan accepted the ransom for Tzympe, knowing well that he
could reoccupy this fortress when he wanted to.[230] As for Gallipoli,
he declared that he could not give back what God had given him. Was it
not the will of God rather than force of arms that had opened the gates
of Gallipoli to him? Cantacuzenos sought an interview with his
son-in-law, for he thought that gold might induce the Osmanlis to
withdraw. A meeting was arranged in the Gulf of Nicomedia. When the
emperor arrived at the rendezvous, a messenger from Orkhan reported that
his master was ill and could not come.[231] No way was left open for
further negotiations. The rupture was complete.

After his return to Constantinople, Cantacuzenos sent envoys to the
Serbians and to the Bulgarians to urge a defensive alliance of the
Balkan Christians. They answered, ‘Defend yourself as best you can.’ A
second embassy met with the response from Czar Alexander: ‘Three years
ago I remonstrated with you for your unholy alliances with the Turks.
Now that the storm has broken, let the Byzantines weather it. If the
Turks come against us, we shall know how to defend ourselves.’[232]

The indignation of the Greeks against the man who had sacrificed them to
his inordinate ambition reached the breaking-point in November 1354. The
inhabitants of Constantinople declared for John Palaeologos.
Cantacuzenos was forced to barricade himself in his palace. Protected by
Catalans and other mercenaries, he tried to temporize. He offered to
abdicate if Matthew were allowed to retain the title of emperor with the
governorship of Adrianople and the Rhodope district. Encouraged by a
lull in the storm of popular feeling, he had the audacity to make an
‘appeal to patriotism’, as he himself put it. He urged the people to
support him in an expedition to retake the provinces conquered by the
Serbians and the Osmanlis. This exhibition of effrontery was greeted
with cries of scorn. Cantacuzenos was publicly accused of wishing to
deliver Constantinople to Orkhan. A second revolution forced his
abdication. He became a monk. Irene took the veil.[233]

John Palaeologos returned from exile, and restored Callixtus to the
patriarchal throne. It took several years of fighting and negotiating to
compel Matthew’s abdication. Not until 1358 did John V become undisputed
ruler of the remnant of the empire in Macedonia and Thrace.[234] But the
mischief was done. The Osmanlis had put their foot as settlers on
European soil.

Cantacuzenos lived for thirty years in the monastery of Mistra, near old
Sparta. It was long enough for him to see the irreparable injury that
his ambition had caused to his country, and to realize how he had
destroyed the people to rule over whom he had sacrificed every higher
and nobler instinct. Cantacuzenos has had a fair trial before the bar of
posterity. For many long years, far removed from the turmoil of the
world, were spent in the building up of his brief of justification. He
left a history of his life and times. So he pleads for himself. But even
if we did not have the testimony of Gregoras, and of the archives of the
Italian cities and of the Vatican, to supplement the story of
Cantacuzenos, he would stand condemned by his own record of facts.

Cantacuzenos had far more natural ability than Andronicus II and
Andronicus III. During the long and arduous struggle to satisfy his
personal ambition, he showed himself a keen, courageous, resourceful
leader. At the beginning of his career he was in a position of
commanding influence. His country was facing a crisis which would have
called forth the best and noblest in one who loved his race, his
religion, and his fatherland. But John Cantacuzenos loved only himself.
The legacy of the widow and helpless child of the friend who had trusted
and honoured him gave to Cantacuzenos the opportunity for developing
true greatness in the fulfilment of that highest of missions--a sacred
trust. But Cantacuzenos saw only the opportunity for taking advantage of
a dead man’s faith.

To say that Cantacuzenos was the cause of the downfall of the Byzantine
Empire would be to ignore other forces working to the same end, and to
put too great an emphasis upon the power of an individual human will to
shape the destinies of the world. However, in the stage of world
history, leaders of men are the personification of causes. We group
everything around them. The character and acts of Cantacuzenos reveal
the fatal weakness in the Balkan peninsula of his day. The Ottoman
conquest was possible because there was no consciousness of religious or
racial commonweal. How could this larger devotion, this larger sense of
duty and obligation, be expected in men who were not influenced, much
less constrained, by ties of blood and personal friendship?


XIII

Cantacuzenos ceased to be a factor in Byzantine affairs in 1355. But the
Greeks could not rid themselves as easily of Orkhan. The Osmanlis had
come to stay.

It is impossible to establish with any degree of certainty the conquests
of Soleiman pasha in the hinterland of the Gulf of Saros and of the Sea
of Marmora. But we know that he captured Demotika, and cut off
Constantinople from Adrianople by occupying Tchorlu.[235] If these
important places were retaken by the Byzantines after the premature
death of Soleiman, it was only for a brief time. At the beginning of the
reign of Murad the Osmanlis were firmly ensconced along the coasts of
Thrace, and had made some permanent progress into the interior.

There was a sudden and full awakening on the part of the Greeks to the
knowledge that the Ottoman invasion of 1354 was an irreparable disaster.
A year before Soleiman pasha settled his Moslem colonies in the Thracian
Chersonese, the inhabitants of Philadelphia had felt themselves so
completely abandoned by their emperors that they had appealed directly
to the Pope for aid, promising to return to the Roman communion.[236] At
the approach of the Osmanlis in Thrace, the country population had fled
to Constantinople, abandoning everything. Those who had money to
emigrate elsewhere did so immediately. They had no hope of a change in
the fortunes of their country.[237]

The annalists of the Byzantine Empire record no heroic, bitter
resistance to the army of Soleiman pasha. There was no mayor of the
palace, no Joan, to revive the confidence of the people in their rulers,
or to replace the family that had proved its unfitness. The Greeks had
feared Cantacuzenos, and had attributed their hopeless condition to his
alliance with the Osmanlis. But they could not have greater confidence
in John Palaeologos. For he made no effort, not even in the smallest
way, to demonstrate that he was different from his weak and disloyal
forbears.

The Byzantines feared also the intrigues of the Genoese, who were as
persistent in their efforts to undermine the integrity of the Byzantine
Empire, as are the foreigners to-day engaged in commerce in the Levant
to weaken and destroy the authority of the Ottoman Empire.[238] The
banishment of Cantacuzenos could not save them from the Osmanlis.
Palaeologos could not save them. They could not save themselves. The
only way which occurred to them of preventing the Ottoman conquest was
to give themselves to some Christian power. There were actually plans on
foot to offer the remnant of the empire to Venice, to Hungary, even to
Serbia![239]

In France, during the fourteenth century, the Turks were not regarded as
a permanent factor in the Near East. Western Asia Minor was not called
‘Turquie’ or ‘Turquemanie’, but ‘the land which the Turks hold’.[240]
There was no such illusion among the Italians. They accustomed
themselves very rapidly to the idea that the Osmanlis, if not the
Turkish tribes, were in Asia Minor and the Aegaean to stay.

The immigration across the Hellespont in 1354 was not looked upon by
those who were acquainted with the weakness and impotence of the
Byzantines as a raid or as a temporary affair. For several years the
Genoese had thought it to their advantage to seek the friendship of
Orkhan.[241] In 1355 two far-sighted Venetians wrote the whole truth to
the Senate. They did not mince matters. Matteo Venier, baily at
Constantinople, warned the Senate in the strongest terms about the
menace of Ottoman aggrandizement.[242] Marino Falieri went farther. He
pointed out that the Byzantine Empire must inevitably become the booty
of the Osmanlis, and urged his countrymen to get ahead of them.[243]
Prophetic words and daring suggestion. Had Venice at this time had a
Dandolo of the stamp of the intrepid blind Doge who diverted the Fourth
Crusade to wreak his vengeance upon his mutilators, Islam might have
been kept out of Europe.

When John Palaeologos resumed the throne of his fathers, he found
himself as much at the mercy of Orkhan as Cantacuzenos had been. His
dependence is revealed in the story of Halil. Halil, son of Orkhan and
Theodora, was captured by pirates in 1357, and taken to Phocaea. Orkhan
held his brother-in-law responsible for this kidnapping, and called upon
him to rescue his nephew. In February 1358, while the Osmanlis under
Soleiman pasha were advancing in Thrace, we see John V, at the behest
of Orkhan, spending what strength and energy he had in the siege of
Phocaea. Later, when he went back to Constantinople, Orkhan peremptorily
ordered him to return to direct in person the siege. John started out,
and met his fleet, which had become anxious about his absence and had
given up the siege. He could not persuade the galleys to turn back with
him. So he wrote to Orkhan begging to be excused from continuing an
undertaking beyond his power to carry through successfully.

Orkhan was inflexible. He had now become the overlord of the Byzantine
emperor. In March 1359 the successor of Constantine went as a vassal to
meet his Ottoman suzerain at Scutari. He appeased the wrath of Orkhan
only by agreeing to pay a half of Halil’s ransom, and by signing a
treaty of peace that was a virtual acceptance of the new _status quo_ in
Thrace. The peace was to be sealed by the betrothal of his ten-year-old
daughter to Halil. It was as errand boy of Orkhan that John V made one
more trip to Phocaea, paid one hundred thousand pieces of gold for
Halil, and brought him to Nicaea. There the betrothal of the Christian
princess to her Moslem cousin was celebrated by splendid fêtes.[244]

John Cantacuzenos introduced the Osmanlis into Europe. John Palaeologos
accepted their presence in Thrace without a struggle. There is little
choice between these two Johns.


XIV

Orkhan died at the end of this memorable decade.[245] If to Osman is
given the honour of being father of a new people, the greater honour of
founding the nation must be ascribed to Orkhan.[246] Few men have
accomplished a greater work and seen more sweeping changes in two
generations. According to popular legend, Orkhan won his spurs as a
warrior, and a bride to boot, at the capture of Biledjik, when he was
twelve years old. His life was spent in fighting and in making permanent
the results of his fighting. He was as simple in his tastes as his
father had been. At Nicaea he distributed soup and bread to the poor
with his own hands.[247]

There seems to be no basis for the characterization of Orkhan which the
early western historians handed down to posterity. He was neither
vicious nor cruel nor deceitful. His three striking characteristics were
those which mark all men who have accomplished a great work in history,
oneness of purpose, inexhaustible energy, and an unlimited capacity for
detail. He began life as a village lad of an obscure tribe. After a
public career of sixty years he died, the brother-in-law of the emperor
of Byzantium, the friend and ally of Genoa, and potentially master of
Thrace. The purpose of his life is summed up in the sentence we find
upon his coins: ‘May God cause to endure the empire of Orkhan, son of
Osman.’